STORIES OF TENALI RAMAN - ENGLISH

H & C Publishing House 

Thrissur 




Tbe ‘Stories of Tenali RiimiiTi" is an 
entertaining mid thought provoking 
book i hat can be enjoyed by ait age 
groups. These stories high light the 
wisdom, humour mid intelligence oJ' 
Tenali Raman. (he court jester of tbe 
King K risb nude varayur The ingenious 
ways of Tenali Raman in solving 
delicate and complicated problems will 
definitely fascinate i he readers. 



Retold by: George Immatty 

Translated by: SuresKkumar 


H & C PUBLISHING HOUSE 

Thrissur 

Price : Rs. 10/- 


1. TENALI RAMAN, 

THE GREAT COURT JESTER 


STORIES OF TENALI RAMAN 

Retold by: George Immatty 
Translated by: Sureshkumar 

First Published : February 2002 
Reprinted at January 2005 
Typesetting : Sky Graphics, Nilambur 
Printed at : Hebron, Thrissur 

Publishers: 

H&C PUBLISHING HOUSE 
Thrissur - 680 001 
website : handcbooks.com 

Distributors: 

H&C STORES 

Kunnamkulam, Thrissur, Ernakulam, Kottayam 
Kozhikode,Thiruvananthapuram, Palakkad 

Price : Rs. 10/- 


02-10000-010105 


This is the story of Tenali Raman, the famous court 
jester of the renowned Vijayanagaram Empire of Krishna 
Devarayar. The empire was famous for its glory and 
wealth and it was in the State of Andhra Pradesh of 
modern India. The Vijayanagaram Kingdom was estab- 
lished in 1336 AD . The period of Krishna Devarayar is 
considered as the Golden Era of the Vijayanagaram 
Empire. 

Raman was born in Garlappad village in Krishna 
district of Andhra Pradesh. His father Ramayya died 
when Raman was very young. Later, his mother took 
him to Tenali. Thus he became Tenali Raman. After 
completing school education, Raman returned to his 
village. Raman was a very intelligent boy but he was very 
naughty. He was not willing to do any work and was in 
the grip of starvation. Even in the midst of poverty and 
hunger, he used to ridicule his neighbours and friends. 
There are many incidents to prove his wisdom and 
intelligence. 

Once Tenali, the green village was under severe 
drought. All the ponds and wells were dry. All the 
vegetation vanished. Famine spread throughout the 
village. The cry of hunger and thirst echoed everywhere. 
Drinking water became scarce and some of the villagers 
fled for other villages. 



Tenali Raman 


H 

During this time a monk reached the village. The 
moment he set foot on the soil of the village, it began to 
rain. People thought that it was the arrival of the monk 
that caused the shower. Everyone except Raman hailed 
the monk and touched his feet as a sign of reverence. 

Raman was hesitant to accept this logic. His rational 
mind believed that it was not the arrival of the monk 
that caused the rain. It would have rained, even if the 
monk had not arrived. This was his attitude and he told 
this truth to others. The villagers advised him not to 
provoke the monk. But Raman wished to tell the truth to 
the monk. He came near him and told, ‘Hello, Swami, 
have you seen a palm tree ? Once, a tired crow wanted 
to perch on a tree. It saw a palm tree and perched on it . 
At that moment, a nut fell down from the tree. Some 
people, who saw this simultaneous incidents commented, 
‘it was the crow that caused the nut to fall down.’ But I 
think it is nothing but a superstition. Is it not a supersti- 
tion, Swami?’ Raman asked the monk. The ripe nut 
would have fallen, even if the crow did not perch on the 
tree. 

But the villagers were reluctant to accept Raman’s 
arguments. When the people dispersed, the monk called 
Raman and told, ‘You are very intelligent. I will teach 
you a number of mantras. You should recite it daily in 
praise of Kali. The goddess will bless you and she would 
make you famous throughout this land. The coming 
generations will remember you for your wit and glory. 


2. GODDESS KALI BLESSES RAMAN 

Raman learned the Kali mantras taught by the monk. 
He grasped it soon. He went to the Kali temple in the 
night and began to chant it. It was midnight and an 
uneasy calm prevailed in that area. Only Raman’s man- 
tras burst the silence. Suddenly a frightening figure 
appeared on the scene amidst thunderous noise. It was 
really the Goddess Kali. The Kali Devi had thousand 
faces and all the thousand mouths were opened, the long 
teeth stretched outside the mouth. Fire emanated from 
all the thousand eyes. It was altogether a tenable figure. 

But Raman remained unmoved. He did not feel any- 
thing extraordinary. He simply smiled. ‘’Why are you 
laughing?” Devi asked Raman. “A mysterious doubt 
provoked me into laughter. I have only one head and a 
nose. Yet during cold, I find it difficult to wipe out the 
discharge from the nose with my hands. You have got 
thousand heads and the same number of noses, but have 
only two hands. It will be difficult for you to wipe out 
the discharge from all the noses with just two hands. 
Please forgive me for saying this,” Raman answered. 
The reply made Devi to start laughing. She liked Raman’s 
mischief. 

Later the Goddess showed two gold pots to Raman 
and said, “One pot contains milk of wealth, the other 
one milk of wisdom. You can choose any one of them, 



Tenali Raman 


6 

but only one.” Raman was hesitant. “Oh! Devi,old people 
say wealth is sour. What does it mean?” He doubted. 
“The ways chosen by people to become rich are not 
good,” Devi said. “If you drink the milk of wealth, you 



will become rich. On the other hand, the milk of 
wisdom makes you wise and intelligent”. Goddess 
narrated its qualities. Raman used a trick. “How can I 
choose one, without tasting both?” By saying this, Raman 
drank and emptied the two pots of milk within seconds. 


Tenali Raman 


m 

“Oh! Goddess, please pardon me. I want to be both 
rich and wise. One’s life becomes meaningful only if he 
achieves these two things”, Raman justified his action. 
“You are clever”, said the Goddess. “But who told you 
to drink both pots of milk ? As a punishment, I curse 
you to become a jester”, Devi proclaimed. Raman begged 
the Goddess not to curse him, “Oh! Goddess, I want to 
become a good poet as well as a jester. There is also a 
mistake on your part. You held the two pots of milk in 
your hands simultaneously. That means, you too con- 
sider both the pots of milk as equal”. 

Kali Devi was in a fix. “ One day you will 
become a good poet and a jester. But the coming 
generations will remember you as a jester only”. After 
blessing Raman, the Goddess disappeared. Raman 
became excited and thanked Kali Devi. 

3. PRIEST CHEATS RAMAN 

After becoming a youth, Raman wished to please 
Krishnadevarayar, the emperor of Vijayanagaram. He 
wanted to be an inmate of the king’s durbar. ‘How can 
I achieve this?’ he thought for a while. 

During this period, Raman got married and had a son. 
Still he wished to become an inmate of the palace. 
Neither the family ties nor its burden bothered him. 



Tenali Raman 

At that time, the durbar priest of Vij ay anagaram named 
Tathachary came to the Devi temple at Mangalagiri near 
Tenali. “How can I appease the priest ?” Raman thought. 
It is easy to become a member of the durbar if the priest 
helped, as the king revered the priest very much. 

Raman approached Tathachary with this intention. 
But the priest was clever and cunning. ‘If Raman 
becomes a jester at the durbar, my fame and reputation 
will end,’ swamy thought. Moreover Raman had shown 
his poem titled “Lingapurana” to him. 

The priest had other plans in his mind. ‘I can have all 
the works done by Raman, as long as I stay here. My old 
age prevents me to do all the works by myself. Let him 
stay with me at Mangalagiri. He can be fooled by offer- 
ing a job in the palace’, Tathachary dreamed. Raman 
was ready to do any work for swamy to become an 
inmate of the king’s durbar. So, he stayed with the priest 
and helped him in his day to day affairs. During his stay 
there, Raman had recited the poem ‘Lingapurna’ to the 
priest. The priest became jealous of Raman. What an 
excellent poem! It contains a great poet’s wisdom and 
imagination. He congratulated Raman. ‘You are too good 
to be an inmate of the palace. The king will definitely 
like you’. Tathachary praised Raman but with dubious 
intention. Raman continued to serve the priest with 
dedication. 


Tenali Raman ' 1 

At last the day came for the priest to return. Tathachary 
shed crocodile tears and said, “I am grateful to your 
sincere service. As soon as I reach there, I will send a 
man to invite you to the palace. You just accompany him. 

I will manage the rest”. Raman sent the priest off, with 
tears in his eyes. He was relieved from tension. ‘I am 
going to become an inmate of the palace soon’ he dreamt. 
But nobody came to him as promised by the priest. He 
felt desperate. His long wait for the job was in vain. 

Raman left for Vij ay anagaram along with his wife 
and child. His aim was to seek a job in the palace. The 
journey was very difficult. He reached the priest’s house 
and informed the servant about his arrival. ‘I am Raman 
from Tenali. I want to see your master.’ The priest’s usher 
went inside and told about Raman’s arrival. But 
Tathachary’s reply was not favourable. ‘I don’t know 
any Raman from Tenali. I don’t want to see him’ . When 
the usher informed this to Raman, he became furious. 
He rushed in to the priest’s house and said, ‘I am Raman 
from Tenali. It was I who served you at Mangalagiri. 
I came here to remind you of your promise’ . Tathachary 
could not tolerate the action of Raman. The angry priest 
ordered his servant to beat and push Raman out of the 
house. Raman felt sad and dejected. ‘He is a cheat. 
I will teach him a lesson,’ Raman vowed to take revenge. 



4. RAMAN EXCELS 

Eminent scholars from different parts of the coun- 
try have assembled at the king’s durbar for the routine 
debate. Raman went directly to the durbar and sat among 
the audience. It was a discussion and debate on 
‘illusion’. A scholar from North India said, ‘All we see 



on earth are mere illusions. Our happiness, well-being, 
sadness are all illusions. It is only the thoughts which 
make us happy or sad’. Everybody assembled at the 


Tenali Raman 



durbar agreed with his arguments. ‘What a philosopher 
he is ! ’ they hailed the scholar. 


The king looked around to see anybody to counter 
the scholar. But no one came forward. The king felt 
dejected. Suddenly he heard a voice and it was Raman 
challenging the scholar. “Dear friends, the scholar said 
here that it was thought which gives us happiness and 
sadness. At present it is noon and let the beloved king 
give us sumptuous meal. We can all eat the food. The 
scholar should not eat it. Let him think that he is eating. 
Will this thought satisfy his hunger?” Raman challenged. 
His arguments put the scholar in a fix. The king called 
Raman to his side and congratulated. He gave Raman 
prizes including gold coins. 


5. RAMAN BECOMES JESTER 

One day a magician from North India came to the 
durbar. He displayed various magical tricks which 
pleased the King Krishnadevarayar. The magician showed 
an unusual item during the show. It was the magic of 
separating his head from the body. ‘Can anyone in 
Vijayanagaram do this magic?’ he challenged the inmates 
of the durbar. But nobody dared do it. The king felt 
dejected. 

Raman came forward. He bowed before the King and 
the audience and went to the magician. ‘Can you do the 



' * Tenali Raman 

trick with open eyes, which I perform by closing my 
eyes?’ Raman challenged the magician. The magician 
did not feel anything unusual in Raman’s offer. ‘I can 
do any trick with open eyes, which Raman does with 
closed eyes’, the magician consoled himself and accepted 
the challenge. Raman brought a bag full of chilli pow- 
der. By closing his eyes, he sprinkled the powder on to 
it. He stood still for some time. After that he removed 
the entire powder and opened his eyes. Later Raman 
brought another bag full of chilli powder and handed it 
over to the magician. He asked the magician to do the 
trick with open eyes. The magician tried to escape from 
the scene. The people assembled there ridiculed him. 
The dejected wizard ended his programmes and returned 
home. The king became excited. It was Tenali Raman’s 
wisdom and intelligence that paid. The king appointed 
Raman as his court jester. The public who assembled 
there congratulated Raman. The court priest Tathachary, 
who was also present there hailed Raman, but he was 
jealous. 


6. TAKE VENGEANCE ON 
TATHACHARY 

Tenali Raman thus became the court jester or 
Krishnadevarayar. He built a house for his family. He 
almost settled his family matters. He was seeking a 
chance to teach Tathachary a lesson. At last, Raman 
found a way to take vengeance on the priest. 


Tenali Raman 1— Li 

Tathachary had a routine bath daily at 4 a.m. 
He bathed at Tungabhadra river, near the palace. He usu- 
ally undressed his robes before bathing. The tantrik rules 
strictly prohibit naked bathing by a king’s priest. 



Tathachary who knew all the rules did not obey any of 
them. ‘I will do as I like. Nobody is to question me’, 
was his attitude. 


Tenali Raman 


[14 

One day, Raman followed Tathachary to the bathing 
ghat without the latter’s knowledge. Tathachary in his 
usual way undressed his robes on the bank of the river. 
Raman went there quietly, took it and hid the dress at 
another place. After bathing, Tathachary, came in search 
of his dress, but could not find it. 

He saw Raman there. Raman remained unmoved and 
stood unfamiliar to the court priest. His mind moved 
back. ‘It was the same priest who discarded me when I 
approached him at Vijayanagaram, where as, I had nursed 
him at Mangalagiri’, Raman thought. Tathachary knew, 
it was Raman who had taken away his dress. ‘Hey 
Raman, kindly, give me the dress’, the priest begged. 
Tathachary had to remain naked under the water all the 
time. Raman narrated the painful experience faced by 
him when he earlier approached Tathachary. 

‘Please forgive me and return my dress’, Tathachari 
pleaded before Raman. ‘Okay, I will give back the dress 
on one condition. You should carry me on your 
shoulders to the palace,’ Raman put forward his condi- 
tion. ‘This is a mark of repentance for your sinful deeds’, 
he added. Tathachary agreed the condition and Raman 
returned the dress to him. The priest began to walk along 
the crowded streets, carrying Raman on his shoulders. 
The people laughed at the priest. 


7. TIT FOR TAT 

The king was wandering on the portico of the 
palace. He saw a strange scene. The revered priest was 
carrying Raman on his shoulders, like a donkey. Raman 
was booing. The people assembled on either side of the 
road laughed at the unusual scene. The king was unable 
to tolerate this. “A respected priest like Tathachary 
cannot be treated like this”. The king called two of his 
soldiers and ordered, “See a man carrying another on 
his shoulders, you bring down the man on top and beat 
him, and bring the other man here.’ 

Raman saw the king’s gestures to the soldiers. He 
felt something wrong in it. He saw the soldiers coming 
from a distance. Suddenly Raman got down from 
Tathachary’s shoulders and touched his feet as a mark 
of respect. You have carried me on your shoulders till 
now. Sorry, I will carry you similarly as a part of my 
regret’, Raman said. 

The foolish priest felt proud and agreed at once and 
climbed on Raman’s shoulders. Raman started walking. 
The two soldiers who reached the scene brought down 
the priest, and beat him. Tathachary could not 
understand what was happening. The priest remembered 
the scene in which his servants beating Raman, when 
the latter visited his house. 



8. KING ORDERS EXECUTION 


Th e soldiers brought Raman before the king instead 
of Tathachary. The soldiers didn’t know the trick played 
by Raman. The king couldn’t tolerate the arrogance of 
Raman. “He is a devil. I had ordered to beat Raman and 
bring the priest”, king said. It was the reverse that had 
happened. 

The soldiers replied “We have done as per your 
order. When we reached the spot, we saw Raman carry- 
ing the priest on his shoulders, so we brought Raman 
here. We haven’t done any harm to him.” Raman was 
listening like a spectator. 

The furious king said, “Raman has insulted a priest 
who is revered by whole citizens. This has, in effect, 
insulted me also. Take away this devil, and behead him. 
After that show the blood-stained sword to the army 
chief’, the king could not control himself. Raman didn’t 
utter a word. The soldiers took away Raman outside. 

9. RAMAN ESCAPES 

The death sentence pronounced on Raman was heard 
by two close aides of the King. The two had animosity 
with the priest. They had also witnessed the beating of 
Raman at Tathachary’s residence earlier. Both had the 
intention of saving Raman from the capital punishment. 


Tenali Raman 


They followed Raman and prepared a plan. For this they 
brought a goat. 

The two followed Raman to the jungle where the ex- 
ecution was to be performed. The goat was also with 
them. They arranged the soldiers to kill the goat and 
show the blood stained sword to the army chief. The 
soldiers who earlier refused to obey, later accepted ij. 
They also asked Raman not to remain in the native land. 
Raman gave them 10 gold coins each and left the place. 
The soldiers returned to the palace and showed the blood 
stained sword to the army chief. Everybody thought that 
Raman was executed. Some of them felt sad. But 
Tathachary was happy for getting rid of his enemy. 

10. FAMILY PENSION 

Raman, who escaped from the death sentence went 
directly to his home. He asked his mother and wife to 
plead before the King. They reached the palace and 
began to lament before the king. ‘Oh lord ! you had killed 
Raman. He was the only earning member of our house. 
I am a widow and who will look after me henceforth. 
How can I live ?’ Raman’s mother Lakshmamma cried 
before the King. 

‘Oh lord! How cruel you are! I have also become a 
widow now. How will I look after my son?, Raman’s 




Tenali Raman 


wife Mangamma also cried before the king. After hear- 
ing the two, the king felt sad. His heart filled with compa- 
ssion. He consoled the two ladies. The king ordered to 
give 100 gold sovereigns each to them. Krishnadevarayar 
also issued orders to grant 20 sovereigns as monthly 
pension to the family. Lakshmamma and Mangamma 
returned home and handed over the gold coins to Raman. 
Raman burst into laughter. ‘The amount paid as bribe to 
soldiers to escape from the death sentence has now been 
regained’. The mother and wife also joined Raman in 
laughter. 


11. SOUL OF A BRAHMIN 

Killing Brahmin is a great sin. A great repentance 
is needed to compensate the sin. This was the belief that 
prevailed since long ago. Tenali Raman was a Brahmin. 
The king had killed Raman. This cruel act will have nega- 
tive impact on the entire country. Such a divine voice 
was heard by the queens of the palace. They informed 
it to king Krishnadevarayar. He convened a meeting of 
the priests and decided to bury the soul of Raman. 

During a moonless night, the head priest and 108 
assistant priests set out from the palace to the nearby 
temple. It was midnight. They had planned to bury 
Raman’s soul under a banyan tree adjacent to the temple. 
Raman knew this secret. He painted black oil on his 


Tenali Raman 1 a I 

body and sat on the banyan tree. He looked like a ghost. 
The priests began to chant mantras under the tree to 
invoke the spirit. Soon Raman jumped on them, the 
priests were bewildered and cried. They thought it was 
a ghost. They ran for shelter and returned to the palace. 



At dawn, they informed the king about the previous 
day’s experience. The news spread throughout the entire 
empire. The fear of ghost weakened the mobility of the 
people. The king became worried. At last he found a 
solution. 

He announced, “We had to exorcise the ghost. Anyone 
who do this will be rewarded with 1000 gold sovereigns.” 



Tenali Raman 

The messengers announced the king’s proclamation 
throughout the country. Raman who returned home also 
heard this news. He felt happy as his plans proved 
fruitful. 


Tenali Raman I I 

‘As a result of my obsequies, things will proceed as if 
the Brahmin was not killed at all.’ ‘In that case can you 
revive Tenali Raman’?, the king doubted. 


12. RAMAN REACHES 
PALACE AGAIN 

The bad news of Brahmin’s ghost spread all over 
the Vijayanagaram empire. Naturally people were in fear. 
Even two days after the proclamation, there was no 
response from the public. On the third day, the king was 
sitting gloomy in the durbar. Tathachary also sat beside 
the king. A soldier came before the king and announced 
the arrival of a sage. The king ordered to bring the sage 
in. The sage came . He wore a saffron dress. He had 
long hair and beard. The long matted hair extended up 
to his navel. He wore a beads roll around the neck. 
Altogether the king liked the sage. ‘I am ready to evict 
the Brahmin’s soul. Are you ready to reward with any- 
thing I demand?’ the monk asked. ‘I am ready. But don’t 
ask things which would, affect the reputation or well- 
being of the nation’, the king clarified. 

The sage agreed the condition. The king had other 
ideas in mind. ‘ Along the eviction of Brahmin’s soul, is 
it possible to absolve from the sin of killing Tenali 
Raman?’ the king asked the sanyasi. The monk replied. 



‘If Tenali Raman resurrect, he will become regular 
nuisance for you, so it is better to perform obsequies for 
the killing. Do not revive him’, court priest Tathachary 



Tenali Raman 


1 22 

told the king. It is well known that Raman was a threat 
to Tathachary. ‘As per rule, how can the order of a king 
to kill the law-breaker become a sin ?’ the monk said. 
Even if it is for maintaining law, act of Killing is a Kill- 
ing and it is sinful. We must bury the soul of Raman’, the 
court priest said. ‘The harassment of the ghost is at the 
temple, which is seven furlong away from here. You have 
to go there. We will make all necessary arrangements 
for the pooja tomorrow’, Tathachary added. 

But the monk had other ideas. He said, ‘All the rites 
can be done here itself now.’ He saw fear gripping on 
the face of Tathachary.’ Even if Tenali Raman is alive, 
it won’t cause any harm, as he became a ghost due to 
unnatural death’, the sage consoled Tathachary 

‘The sin of killing a Brahmin also has to be expi- 
ated’, the king suggested. 

‘Oh ! lordjl am doing both the rites together. Don’t 
worry’, saying this the ascetic removed his beard and 
matted hair. The king became excited. Tathachary moved 
back with fear. ‘I am the Brahmin, killed by you’, he 
(old loudly. It was really Tenali Raman. Thus Raman 
appeared alive at the court durbar. All of them believed 
that Raman was dead. The king asked Raman ‘What do 
you want from me?’ ‘A thousand gold sovereigns and 
release from death sentence’, Raman replied, at once. 
The king accepted the demands and acted accordingly. 


13. ANOTHER DEATH SENTENCE 

The fame and goodwill of Vijayanagaram empire 

made many people jealous. There were attempts to kill 
the King Krishnadevarayar. Once, a spy from Nalgonda 
came to Vijayanagaram. His mission was to assassinate 
Krishnadevarayar. The spy, somehow stayed at Tenali 
Raman’s house. The king didn’t know about it. 

The spy, in the absence of Raman, sent a messenger 
to the king. It was an invitation to visit Raman’s house. 
The king thought that it was Raman who had sent the 
messenger to him. There may be some serious matter 
otherwise, a jester won’t invite the king to his house. As 
soon as the king entered Raman’s house, the spy dashed 
forward with a dagger to kill him. The timely interven- 
tion of fellow people saved the king from danger. 

The crime committed by Raman in providing shelter to 
a spy with the intention to kill the king, was severe 
During the trial, Raman admitted the crime. It was the mon- 
ster Appaji who sentenced Raman with death penalty. 
People became upset over the verdict. They protested. 
Then the minister gave Raman a small favour. Raman 
was allowed to choose the mode of his death. Raman 
said ‘I feel sorry for sentencing me death penalty. The 
crime was done without my knowledge or consent. 
Anyway I am thankful to the minister for allowing me 
to choose the mode of my death. As per the ministers 
order, I am declaring the mode of death. I prefer old age 



Tenali Raman 

death’ ! The people were excited over the comment. They 
hailed Raman. Thus, he escaped from the death-trap 
once more. 

14. FAKE MONK ASSASSINATED 

There was a fake monk at Vijayanagaram who 
indulged in several crimes including murders. He was 
very clever and eloquent. He looked smart and well 
dressed. He also behaved politely. But in true life, he 
was cruel and wicked. His mode of operation was 
strange. If there was animosity between two people, he 
would favour the rich man among them and collect 
money from him. He will promise to destroy the enemy. 
Then he will reach the enemy’s house and stay there 
pretending as a monk. When the time comes he will 
poison the host’s food. The enemy will either die or 
become a mental patient. This was the queer mode of 
operation of the monk. He had cheated several people 
like this. But Tenali Raman identified the true colour of 
the ‘sanyasi’. 

. One day, Raman met the monk on his way. At that 
time, a man cheated by the monk also came near them. 
The man had become a mental patient due to the mis- 
deeds of the monk. Raman caught hold of the mental 
patient and introduced him to the monk. The fake 
‘sanyasi’ looked seriously at the mental patient. He soon 
became a violent person and killed the monk. Raman 
was excited. ‘A fake is dead’, he consoled himself. The 
mental patient walked away after a ‘successful mission’. 


15. RAMAN ESCAPES 
ANOTHER ATTEMPT 

The death of the monk had its consequence. The 
mental patient was arrested for killing the monk. He was 
acquitted on the grounds of mental insanity. But the trial 
of the case continued. 

The trial proved that Tenali Raman was guilty. So 
Raman was ordered to be executed by the king. The mode 
of killing, ordered by the king was strange. Raman was 
to be brought to an isolated area and his body was to be 
covered with earth up to the neck. Later, he was to be 
trampled to death by an elephant. 

The soldiers began to execute the king’s order. Raman 
was brought to the spot where a pit was dug for the pur- 
pose and kept him in it with neck deep in mud. The 
soldiers then went to bring, the elephant. At that time, a 
dhobi came that way. He was a hunch back. Raman 
noticed the hunch on the dhobi. He laughed at the dhobi. 
The washerman looked at Raman, who was covered up 
to his neck by mud. 

‘Why are you standing in the pit covered with earth?’ 
The dhobi asked Raman. ‘I am a hunch back. I am stand- 
ing like this to remove the bent on my back’, Raman 
told. ‘If I too stand like this, will my hunch also 
vanish?’ the dhobi asked. ‘Definitely. If you have any 
doubt, remove the earth and look,’ Raman said. The 
dhobi removed the earth covered on Raman. He didn’t 
see any hunch on Raman. The dhobi was unaware of the 



Ten all Raman 


good health of Raman. He thought that Raman had a 
hunch on his back, before covering his body with mud. 
The dhobi had trust in the wofds of Raman. He stood in 
the pit and covered his body upto neck with earth. Raman 
returned home. In the meantime the elephant came and 
trampled the dhobi to death. • 


16. PENSION TO DHOBI’S WIFE 

Th e king was very much dejected. He thought that 
Raman was dead. It was he who ordered to kill Raman 
for assassinating a monk. The king was distressed after 
knowing that the dead monk was a criminal. 
Although it was Raman who was responsible for the 
murder, the act saved several innocent people. The king 
began to cry and tears flowed from his eyes. 

Raman, who knew about it appeared before the king. 
He narrated how he escaped from the death sentence. 
The king felt compassionate to the dhobi’s family. He 
ordered to pay pension to dhobi’s wife. She also got 
married to a man without hunch, after an year. 


17. REBIRTH TO RAMAN 

Raman once borrowed 1 00 gold coins from the King 
Krishnadevarayar. But he couldn’t repay it even after 
long time. The King’s manager sent a messenger to 


Tenali Raman 1 27 J 

Raman, demanding the money. But, Raman had no 
money with him. He had other loans to be paid. 

‘I have no money at present. It will be paid later’, 
Raman told the messenger. After he left, Raman laid at 
the bed like a dead man. The body was covered with 
white clothes, from top to bottom. His mother and wife 
sat near the ‘body’ crying aloud. The neighbors who 
heard the cries assembled at Raman’s house. They saw 
Raman lying dead. The king also reached there to pay 
homages. The king consoled Raman’s mother and wife 
How did Raman die instantly?’ he asked. 

‘My son had no disease at all. He had owed 100 gold 
sovereigns to the palace. A messenger had come here 
today, demanding the money. Instantly Raman laid in 
bed. He didn’t wake up since then. He asked me to 
pay the money. This was the last wish uttered by my 
son’, Raman’s mother told the king. 

The king called his manager immediately “Write off 
all debts owed by Raman. His mother should not feel 
sad regarding this”, the king ordered. 

As soon as the king declared the order, Raman woke 
up from the bed by removing the white clothes. The king 
was shocked. He moved a little backward. ‘Oh lord! 
Don’t be frightened. I was resurrected from death hear- 
ing your generosity,’ Raman laughed and bowed before 
the king. 



L±2J Tenali Raman 

‘You have resurrected when the debt amount was writ- 
ten off. Then how did you die?’ the king queried. ‘I died 
due to the burden of the debt. When you removed the 
burden, life returned to me’, Raman burst into laughter. 
The king also laughed. He raised the salary of Raman. 
Consequently, Raman did not borrow any money as loan. 


18. REWARD FOR INSULT 

Th e King Krishnadevarayar bought a horse. It was 
a highly trained animal. The horse showed various 
actions which surprised the soldiers. People began to 
praise the horse. 

One day, the king was doing exercises sitting on the 
horse. The venue was a bridge on top of the 
Thungabhadra river. Raman came near and looked at 
the exercises. He told the king, ‘Your horse is good. But 
can you do all the exercises done by my horse, with your 
horse?’ 

‘Yes, certainly. Bring your horse, let us see’, the king 
replied. He did not like Raman for insulting his horse. 
Raman brought a horse soon. It was a weak animal. 
The horse, only with bones and skin looked like an 
animal affected by famine. If anybody climbed on its 
back, the animal would fall down. Such was the pitiable 
condition of the horse. 


Tenali Raman K” I 

Raman brought the horse by pulling and pushing. The 
king looked at what Raman was doing with the horse. 
When the horse reached at the centre of the bridge, 



Raman pushed it into the river. It sWimmed in the river 
for some time to safety, but, succumbed to injuries at 
last. The poor state of health prevented the horse to 
escape. The king got angry seeing this. ‘Raman, what 
have you done ? You killed the horse by pushing it into 
the river’. 




Tenali Raman 


‘Yes lord, I did it for saving your horse. Your horse 
cannot do such kind of an exercise’, Raman replied. The 
king criticised Raman for the death of the horse. But 
Raman’s justification was strange ‘Lord, loss of a 
useless friend is not a loss. Sometimes it may yield gain’ . 
The king accepted Raman’s argument. He also gave 
Raman a bag full of money. 


19. MEAT EATING HORSE 

Horse is a vegetarian. But sometimes it has to be 
turned into a non- vegetarian also when it matters. Here 
is the story of how Raman turned his horse to a non- 
vegetarian. 

It was an evening on a rainy day. Raman did not 
expect rain on that day. He set out riding the horse. 
After some time, it began to rain. He did not return, but 
continued his journey. Rain continued unabated. Raman 
travelled further. He was drenched in water. 

When he started shivering, Raman entered a near by 
shop. The horse was kept in front of the shop. Meat 
cutlet was selling at the shop. He was shivering with 
cold. Some kind of heat will cease the shivering. But 
people seemed surrounding the stove. Raman was in a 
fix. 


Tenali Raman 



‘My horse is hungry. It wants four meat cutlets’, 
Raman told the shop keeper. But people wondered. ‘Will 
the horse eat meat cutlet?’ ‘I want to see the horse’ , one 
man said and walked outside the shop to see the horse. 
Everybody followed the man. They all began to look at 
the strange horse. Raman in the meantime sat near the 
stove and dried his dresses. The shivering and coldness 
of the body also disappeared. The rain also receded. 
Raman bought cutlet and went outside. He showed 
cutlet to the horse. But the horse did not pay any atten- 
tion. Raman gave the cutlets to a dog standing nearby. 
He rode on the horse. The people curiously looked at 
Raman and not at the horse. 


20. HUMAN SACRIFICE 

Human sacrifice was common in ancient India. Even 
today also, there are reports of human sacrifice made by 
savage people. Human sacrifice was banned at the 
Vijayanagaram empire during Krishnadevarayar’s rule. 
What can be done, if human sacrifice is the only 
solution to set things right? 

Raman found a way to perform human sacrifice. 
Abridge, constructed across the river Thungabhadra by 
the king, washed away even before its construction was 
over. Superstition among the public was that the destruc- 
tion of bridge was caused due to the anger of a ghost. 



Tenali Raman 


I 32 

‘The ghost did not like the bridge. To appease the 
ghost, a human sacrifice is a must’ , the people said. ‘If it 
is not made the bridge will collapse before its comple- 
tion’, a monk opinioned. He was a cruel and a saddist monk. 
The king was in a dilemma. He wanted the bridge to be 
built across the river Thungabhadra . The bridge has to 
be strong and durable. 

The king consulted Raman, ‘A human sacrifice is 
necessary for a durable bridge’, Raman said. His reply 
doubled the king’s grief. T am not willing to erect a 
bridge by sacrificing innocent people. It is unwise to 
please the ghost like this,’ the king declared. 

But Raman has other ideas. He advised ‘the bridge 
has to be built. It is necessary for the nation’s progress. 
The ghost can be pleased by performing human sacri- 
fice. There are ways for it’. 

‘What are the ways?’, the king was eager to know 
about it. ‘There are number of criminals in the country 
who were sentenced to death. Their lives should be sac- 
rificed for public welfare. Now onwards, execute their 
sentences at the site of the bridges to be built. Your high- 
ness should issue necessary orders in this regard. The 
problem can be solved in this manner’, Raman clarified. 

The king showed a sign of relief. He was excited. He 
rewarded Raman by presenting 1000 gold sovereigns. 
The king was always generous to Raman. That made 
the court jester a rich man. 


21. RAMAN’S DONATION 

‘We must donate a portion of our wealth to the poor. 
By God’s grace you are provided with houses and 
properties. Is it possible to donate a portion of your 
assets to the poor?’, the King Krishnadevarayar 



‘Your remark is very correct. I will make arrange- 
ments for donating a house tomorrow’, Raman replied. 
The king was glad. Raman returned home. He was 
reluctant to part with anything that came to his possession. 
He hanged a board in one of his houses notifying this. 




1°^ I Tenali Raman 

‘The house is to be donated. Anyone who is satisfied 
himself with his assets is eligible for this house’. 

Many read the board. But nobody came forward to 
accept the house. At that time a Brahmin came there. 
‘Swamy, Please do me a favour by donating this house to 
me’, he told Raman. ‘Don’t you have a house?’, Raman 
asked the Brahmin. ‘Yes, 1 have. But it is small and old’ . 

‘Have you read the board in front of the house? The 
house is to be donated to those who are satisfied them- 
selves with their assets. You seem to be dissatisfied with 
yourself’, Raman said. 

The Brahmin became silent. He had no answer. He 
thought for a second, ‘If I say I am dissatisfied, Raman 
won’t donate me the house’. The Brahmin replied, ‘I 
am satisfied with what I have’. Raman said ‘You are 
satisfied with yourself, isn’t it ? ‘Yes’, the Brahmin 
answered. ‘Then why did you come in search of my 
house?’, Raman doubted. The Brahmin was ashamed. 
He returned empty handed. Later nobody came in search 
of Raman’s house. 


Tenali Raman 


35 


Once the King Krishnadevarayar exhibited 10 pups 
in the durbar hall. The bend of its tail has to be straight- 
ened. He offered 100 gold sovereigns to those who 
straightened the tail of the pups. The king was of the 



22. LENGTH OF DOG’S TAIL 

It is difficult to change one’s behaviour.lt is a 
common saying that ‘The bend of dog’s tail won’t 
straighten, even if it is put in a tube for thousand years’. 
But Raman had straightened the dog’s tail once. The story 
is like this. 


belief that its tail could never be straightened. He al- 
lowed three months to those who take the pups to 
straighten their tails. Many took the pups home. They 
were confident of achieving success in this regard. 

The people who brought the pups began to perform 
tricks in its tail. One man tied a stone in its tail to get rid 


Tenali Raman 


I 36 

of its bend. The poor pup walked with weight in its tail. 
Another man put a metal tube around its tail. The third 
person called a masseur to massage the pup’s tail. The 
fourth person bought costly medicines produced by a 
doctor and applied to the dog. The fifth person chanted 
‘mantras’ and performed ‘poojas’ with the help of 
sorcerer to straighten the tail. The sixth man thought if 
the pup becomes fat, its tail will straighten. So he gave 
the pup milk, butter, ghee and other nutritious food. 

These people suffered a lot to fulfill the challenge 
posed by the king. Raman came to know about all these 
from various people. He did not spend a single paise for 
this mission. He simply tied his pup and provided only 
food for its survival. His pup began to weaken day by 
day. 

At last the day came for the return of the pups to the 
durbar. All of them produced the pups before the king. 
The tails of the nine pups remained as usual. Their bend 
couldn’t be straightened. Then it was the turn of Raman 
to produce his pup. Its tail was not bent. The pup was 
unable to move its tail or stand erect. 

The king inspected the ten pups. He saw the tail of 
Raman’s pup standing straight. He gave the promised 
100 gold sovereigns to Raman. Everybody hailed 
Raman’s wisdom. The continuous starvation made the 
pup’s tail to remain straight. Similarly constant famine 
can change a man’s behaviour, according to Raman. 


23. RAMAN AND THE PRIESTS 

Raman’s dog died. It was due to starvation that the 
dog had died. The court priests used this situation to 
trap Raman. They propagated that Raman’s action of 
putting the pup to starvation was deliberate. The dog’s 
soul is wandering, they alleged. 

Fear gripped among the people about the dog’s ghost. 
The priest asked Raman to bury the dog’s ghost. They 
conspired to grab money from Raman in the name of 
poojas. But Raman came to know about the dubious 
plans of the priests. ‘You do the poojas and bury the 
dog’s ghost. I am going to sell my horse. It is a good 
horse. I will give you the money by selling the horse’, 
Raman promised the priests. 

The priests were happy. They thought the horse will 
yield at least 100 gold coins. They believed that their 
plans are going to succeed. ‘Poor Raman, he fell in our 
trap’, one priest said. ‘Raman received 100 gold coins 
from the king, by way of putting the dog to starvation 
death. We are going to get that money’, another priest 
laughed. 

The priests did some poojas the other day to 
convince Raman and the locals. They approached Raman 
for remuneration for further poojas. Raman in the mean- 
time had advertised the sale of his horse. ‘ A horse is for 
sale. It costs only a copper coin. Those who want to buy 
the horse has to buy a dustbin also. Then only the horse 



Tenali Raman 


38 

will be given. The dustbin costs 100 gold coins’. This 
was the advertisement appeared for the sale of the horse. 
The sale was effected at the time of priests’ arrival for 
the remuneration of poojas. 

Raman gave the money received from the sale of the 
horse, a single copper coin. He got the dustbin’s cost of 
100 gold coins. Raman taught a lesson to the greedy and 
jealous priests. They did not receive the actual price of 
the horse; whereas the dustbin yielded 100 coins. Thus 
Raman ridiculed the priests and managed to get full 
amount for his horse. 


24. MOUSTACHE EATING HORSE 

The Mughal emperors were planning to attack 
Vijayanagaram. King Krishnadevarayar knew about the 
mobilisation of forces on the borders. He also made 
arrangements for national security. The strength of 
cavalry was also increased. 

The king bought some ponies. He handed over them 
to his trusted locals to bring up. He had also arranged to 
provide 15 silver coins per month towards the feeding 
expenses of the horses. Raman, who knew about this, 
reached the palace and brought a horse. Raman was in 
dire need of money at that time. He tied the pony to an 
adjacent room in his house. He sealed the entrance in 
that room. The fodder was given to the horse through a 
hole dug on the wall. 


Tenali Raman 


Raman did not use the money for providing food to 
the horse. Instead he spent the money for food to his 
people. The price of provisions in the country was high, 
as lion’s share was allocated to national security. So 
Raman did not spend even a copper coin for food to the 
horse. He gave handful of dried grass daily to the horse 



for its survival. Months have passed. The king ordered 
to present all the horses at the durbar. Everybody 
except Raman presented the horse at the palace. 




Tenali Raman 


[40 

Raman informed the king that it was not so easy to 
bring his horse to the palace. Then the king directed his 
Muslim General, in charge of cavalry, to bring the pony. 
The bearded Muslim General was capable of bringing 
any troublesome horse. He reached Raman’s house. 
Raman showed the horse’s room to the General. He 
peeped through the hole in the wall. It was the time of 
giving dried grass to the horse. The hunger- stricken pony 
thought it was dried grass and began to pull the beard 
and moustache of the General. He tried his best to free 
from the clutches of the horse. The General cried for help. 

The people who assembled there cut his beard with a 
knife and saved him from the grip of the horse. The General 
presented the pony at the durbar. For that he has to 
demolish the wall of the room. ‘Why did you keep the 
pony to starvation’, the king asked Raman. ‘I used to 
give handful of dried grass to the horse daily. By giving 
such meagre fodder to the horse, it has done severe harm. 
If it was given sumptuous food, what would have been 
the impact’. Raman joked. The king believed that it was 
the horse which demolished the wall. 

The king did not like Raman’s reply. Yet he contin- 
ued. ‘People in the country are starving. But the horse is 
to be given sumptuous food!’. Raman’s reply made the king 
sensible. The king ordered to cut short the defence 
expenditure and allowed it to be utilised for social 
welfare. He rewarded Raman with 15 gold coins for 
pointing out the failure in his rule. 


25. RAMAN TRESPASSES 

An art festival was going on at the king’s durbar. A 
dance troupe from Kuchipudi has arrived there. The king 
deliberately concealed the news of arts programme from 
Raman. He feared that Raman quay make trouble during 
the dance programme. He also directed the soldiers and 
ushers to prevent Raman. 

The dance started. The King, Queen, Ministers 
and Military Chiefs were all enjoying the programme. 
Raman wished to enter the durbar. ‘Swami, the majesty 
has directed us not -to inform you about the dance 
programme. If it is leaked, we will be beheaded by the 
king’, one of the soldiers told Raman. ‘The king has 
directed not to inform me about the programme, isn’t it? 
Not ordered to deny my entry into the palace’. Saying 
this Raman began to trespass the durbar. Then two sol- 
diers stopped him and insisted on him not to enter the 
palace. 

Raman called one of the soldiers and told secretely. 
‘The king will reward me suitably if I reach inside. 
I will give you half of that reward.’ The soldier became 
happy. Raman told the other soldier similarly. He too 
became happy. Thus Raman entered the durbar with the 
help of those two soldiers. 

The king became furious by seeing Raman. Yet, he 
continued to watch the programme. It was not a good 



Tenali Raman 


entertainment. The king thought how to end the 
programme. The play was about Lord Krishna. It was a 
scene where little Krishna was stealing the dress unrobed 
by the cowherdess. Seeing this, Raman entered the stage 
and beat the hero, who began to cry loudly. Soon the 
programme came to an end as someone unfurled the 
curtain. 


26. SHARING THE REWARD 

The Kuchipudi troupe returned from Vijayanagaram. 
It was Raman who packed up the troupe. The king called 
Raman and questioned. Raman remained unmoved. 
I beat those who lied’ . 

‘He was playing Krishna stories’, isn’t it?’, the king 
asked. ‘If so, I had committed a sin. You penalise me. 
I will dictate the punishment. Beat me 24 times after 
tying to a pillar,’ Raman requested. 

‘Beating 24 times! What are you asking?’ the king 
asked with surprise. The programme of Kuchipudi troupe 
was not so good. ‘It was Raman’s blow which ended 
their programme. For that I am not going to punish you. 
Instead you are to be rewarded’ he added. ‘As reward or 
punishment I want 24 blows only’, Raman insisted. 
‘Why do you demand 24 blows?’, the king became 
curious. ‘I will tell you that later. Please promise 24 
blows !’ Raman’s demand was accepted by the king. 


Tenali Raman 


The soldiers came to carry out the punishment. Two 
soldiers stood on both sides of Raman. ‘Oh lord, your 
reward for my entry inside the palace, is also entitled to 
the two soldiers. I had promised to give half of my re- 
ward to them. The soldiers allowed me to enter the durbar 
only after promising the prize. Thus, 24 blows that you 
promised should be equally divided to the two ushers’, 
Raman pleaded the king. 

The king became furious with the soldiers for defy- 
ing his orders. He wanted to give severe punishment to 
the greedy and corrupt soldiers. He ordered to execute 
50 blows each to the two soldiers. He rewarded Raman 
with money for finding the corrupt officials. 

27. A STRANGE CAT 

Once Vijayanagaram was gripped with rat menace. 
The increase of rat population definitely brings famine 
and food shortage. To destroy the rat menace, the 
authorities decided to bring up cats. The king brought 
one thousand cats for this purpose. He gave a cat each 
to a family. Money was also given to provide milk to the 
cats. 

Raman also brought one cat and reached home. 
According to him, cat can survive even without milk. 
‘Even human beings grow here without milk. We can 
give milk to our son using the money provided by the 



44 


Tenali Raman 


Tenali Raman 


45 


king’, Raman told his wife. ‘But cat will steal the milk 
and drink’, his wife doubted. Raman consoled his wife, 
‘I have found a way to stop it’. 

Raman brought the kitten to his home. But he didn’t 
give even a drop of milk to it. He boiled the milk well. 
A plate of hot milk was placed before of the kitten. The 
cat didn’t touch it. It was afraid of the steam from the 
hot milk. Raman forcibly dipped the cat’s lips in the hot 
milk. Its lip got burned. 

It was a turning point. Henceforth Raman’s cat never 
drank milk. The kitten began to hide when it saw milk. 
Thus Raman made his cat a milk hating animal. He gave 
the milk to his son. A fortnight elapsed. The king or- 
dered to present all the kittens at the durbar. 
Everybody exhibited the cats. They all have become 
healthy by drinking milk. But Raman’s cat alone 
remained lean. 

‘Yeh Raman, what happened to your kitten? Are 
you not giving milk to it?’ the king asked. ‘Oh lord, 
when even a drops of milk is not available for human 
beings to drink, who bothers to feed the cat with milk ?’ 
Raman countered. But the king was furious. So you 
had misappropriated the fund given by me to feed the 
kitten. 

‘I haven’t misused the fund. I have bought milk 
using the fund. Since my cat did not drink milk, I gave it 
to my son’, Raman told. But the king did not give up. ‘Is 


there any cat in this country which does not drink milk ? 
You are lying. I will give you 100 gold coins, if it is 
proved that your cat does not drink milk. On the other 
hand, if your cat drinks milk, you will be whipped 100 

times ! Are you ready?’, the king. challenged. Raman 

agreed. 





Tenali Raman 


A soldier brought a plate of milk and placed before 
the cat. Soon it ran away. It didn’t even smell the milk. 
Thus Raman won the competition. He was presented with 
100 gold coins. Later Raman told the king, how he trained 
it not to drink milk. The king laughed along with Raman. 
The king praised Raman for his wisdom. 

28. EATING SAND 

The king used to prepare special type of sugar 
crystal for himself. After preparation, the sugar will be 
dried and preserved. Once Raman saw this process at 
the palace. He asked the king ‘What is it?’ ‘It is sand’, 
the king tried to fool Raman. But he was doubtful. ‘It is 
a special sand’, the king clarified. 

Raman did not utter anything. The king thought that 
Raman had believed everything he said. The king went 
to his room and told the queens about the incident. The 
queens joined the king in laughter. They all believed that 
the king had befooled Raman. 

Raman went to his home. He returned with his 
son. They began to eat the sugar kept for drying. When 
the king returned from haram, he saw Raman and his 
son eating the sugar. ‘What are you doing?, the king 
asked. 


Tenali Raman 


‘Oh lord! our dearest cow has died. In order to com- 
pensate our sorrows, we are eating sand! Both of them 
continued eating sugar. The king was very much moved 
by Raman’s words. He ordered to collect rest of sugar 
and keep it safely. Henceforth the king never tried to 
fool Raman. 


29. CAPITAL PUNISHMENT AGAIN 

Once the King Krishnadevarayar built a new 
palace. He called a good artist and prepared wall paint- 
ings. The king and Raman started looking at the 





^ Tenali Raman 

paintings. There was beautiful scenery in it. The 
palace was also adorned with princess’s portraits. 

Raman was attracted by a beautiful woman’s portrait. 
It was the rear view of a woman in a sitting pose. Her 
shapely figure, long and curly hair attracted everyone. 
But there was a serious lapse in it. The face of that beau- 
tiful woman was not drawn by the artist. 

‘Where is the front view of this woman?’ Raman 
doubted. ‘The picture has face for the woman. We must 
see it by our imaginative ability. Do you have any sense 
of beauty?’, the king ridiculed Raman . ‘I used to draw 
pictures, when I studied at hermitage. Now I am going 
to learn drawing for one month’, Raman said. ‘It is a 
good thing’, king answered. Raman did not come to the 
palace for one month. After a month he came to the 
palace. I have come here after studying drawing and 
painting’, Raman said. 

‘It is good. As you know, we have a newly built sum- 
mer palace. There are no pictures and paintings there. 
You may draw a picture there’, the king ordered. Raman 
nodded and went to the summer palace. He began to 
draw and paint pictures. But his paintings were strange. 
Parts of our body like eyes, legs and teeth were drawn 
here and there. 

After a week, Raman informed the king that he has 
completed his work. The king went to see the 


Tenali Raman 1 1 

pictures. But he was disappointed. The beautiful walls 
of the building looked dirty by painting. It was a heart- 
breaking scene for the king. He has to live in that palace 
along with guests the day after. ‘ What is this?’ the king 
became furious. 

‘I have painted the pictures of beautiful queen’s leg, 
hands etc. You must have imaginative ability to see them 
in full’, Raman joked. Raman thought the king will laugh 
on hearing the answer. But the King burst with fury and 
ordered ‘Take him away and behead.’ 


30 . FIGHT BETWEEN EXECUTIONERS 

A s soon as the king ordered the execution of Raman, 
two soldiers came forward with sword to carry out the 
order. They set out to the forest. Raman walked bet ween 
the two soldiers. The soldiers had a grudge towards 
Raman. So they had no hesjtation in killing him. On the 
other hand, Raman also planned to cheat the soldiers. 

Their journey was through the bank of the river 
Thungabhadra . On the way Raman said ‘I want to pray 
for a moment immersing in this river’. But one of the 
soldiers was doubtful. ‘If you disappear after immers- 
ing in river, what should we tell the king?’ he said. 

‘I won’t cause any harm to you from the king. I am 
pi epared to die. After I immersed in river, you two stand 



Tenali Raman 


on my sides to prevent me from fleeing. If I try to 
escape in the midst of praying, you cut with swords 
aiming my neck. You can thus evade king’s punishment’, 
Raman told the soldiers. 

Raman stood in water with closed eyes. The soldiers 
were beside him with raised swords. They all stood there 
for some time. Suddenly Raman swimmed into under- 
water. The soldiers cut their swords from both sides si- 
multaneously. The heads of soldiers fell in the river. Their 
bodies were washed away in water. 

Raman who came from underwater saw the dead 
bodies of the soldiers. He reached the durbar to see the 
king. The king was frightened. ‘You have escaped’, he 
said. ‘Oh Lord! Human beings got more value than walls. 
Your anger has resulted in the loss of two lives’. Raman 
told the king what has happened in the execution bid. It 
was Raman’s dirty paintings on the palace wall which 
made the king furious. 


31. RAMAN TRAPS KING AND PRIEST 

Tenali Raman has escaped thrice from the death sen- 
tence. The three escapes were very narrow ones. It was 
Raman’s sheer wisdom and intelligence that saved him 
But fear has gripped on Raman now, ‘If the king pro- 
nounced any other death sentence I may not be able to 
escape? This was the fear of Raman’ . 


Tenali Raman 


Raman planned to get an assurance from the king not 
to order to execute him again. He planned a detailed 
programme to achieve it. The king had a soft comer 
towards women. He was interested in sexual affairs with 
them. The priest Tathachary also had similar habits. 
Raman utilised their weakness. He knew both were fond 
of women. 

He called upon Tathachary and tempted him to 
woman. ‘I have a beautiful woman in my custody. You 
can enjoy with her in my house. Come to my home 
today at 10 p.m.’ Tathachary agreed . Later Raman 
approached the King Krishnadevarayar. ‘Oh Lord, There 
is a beautiful woman in my home. You can enjoy with 
her there. Please visit my home today at 10.15.p.m.’ 
The king also agreed to reach Raman’s house on time. 

Tathachary reached Raman’s house at 10 p.m. Raman 
told the priest certain conditions. The priest has to be 
dressed like a woman and should speak in female voice. 
The priest has to accept the conditions of Raman. He 
was so fond of beautiful women. Raman dressed up the 
priest like a woman. He sat on the silk bed like a disci- 
plined woman. 

‘The woman will reach here soon. She is very shy. 
You must start speaking in female voice. Only after com- 
ing closer, you should disclose that you are a male. Then 
you can proceed further’ . The priest agreed with Raman’s 
idea. After 15 minutes, the king reached there. Raman 




Tenali Raman 


helped the king to dress up like a woman. He 
accompanied the king to the room where Tachachary 
was sitting. Raman closed the door immediately after 
the king entered Tathachary’s room. He peeped through 
the door to witness the ‘unusual drama.’ 


32. ASHAMED KING SWEARS 

Tathachary wished the ‘woman’ who entered into 
his room. The king and the priest believed that the other 
person was a woman. Both were dressed up like woman. 
The king revealed that he was a male and came there to 
enjoy the company of a woman. Tathachary was 
surprised. He realised that it was the real Kirm 
Krishnadevarayar. How can he forget the majestic male 
voice of the king?. 

‘Oh Lord how did you appear here in this costume?’ 
Tathachary enquired. The king understood how he has 
been fooled by Raman. Tathachary also came to know 
about the whole episode. The king ordered to open the 
door. His mind was filled with fear, sadness and anger . 
Raman got frightened. ‘I have done it to save my life. 
You had sentenced me to capital punishment thrice. You 
must swear not to kill me , Raman pleaded. ‘If you deny 
my request, 1 will publicise the whole episode involving 
both of you’, Raman added. 



Raman’s reply changed the king’s mind. ‘The three 
death sentences pronounced by me earlier were all avoid- 
able. It happened due to my sudden fury. Hence forth, 
I won’t sentence you to capital punishment’, the king 
declared. Raman was relieved. He opened the door and 
let them free. 


33. QUARREL BETWEEN 
KING AND QUEEN 

The King Krishnadevarayar had a quarrel with his 
queen Thirumalambal. He didn’t even utter a word to 
his wife for weeks. The king stopped visiting the harem. 
The queen, meantime sought the help of Tenali Raman 
to settle the dispute. Raman agreed and enquired the rea- 
son for the quarrel. 

The queen narrated the incident like this: The king 
wrote a poem. It was a vague one. Certain words like 

sun, moon, stars, beautiful sky were written here and 

there. There was no sense in the poem. The kin g invited 
his ministers to hear his recitation. But they all avoided 
the king on flimsy grounds. After midnight, as there were 
no listeners to his poem, the king went to the harem. 

The queen was sitting on the bed expecting the king. 
She had sleepless nights. As soon as the king reached 
harem, he began to recite the poem. Thirumalambal 
remained sleepy hearing the poem. She began to yawn 
often. The king thought that it was due to disrespect that 
the queen had yawned. The king who left the harem then, 
had not returned there yet. 

The queen wept after narrating the story. Raman 
assured her that he will find a solution to the problem. 
He consoled the queen. Raman waited for the moment 
to settle their dispute. Soon the day camp. 


34. RAMAN SETTLES THE QUARREL 

Once, the King’s durbar was discussing a serious 
issue. It was about the paddy cultivation in Telangana 
district. The king said the improvement of agriculture is 
necessary to meet food shortage. The experts discussed 
how to utilise the water from Thungabadra river for 
agriculture. Everybody put forward their suggestions. 

Then came the turn of Tenali Raman. He came 
before the king with a plate of paddy seeds. Raman said . 
T reached here with a new type of paddy seeds. If it is 
sowed, the yield will be three times more than the present 
result’. But the king was reluctant to admit the claim. 
‘That cultivation need particular type of soil, fertilizers 
and pesticides. Our farmers will suffer due to their 
ignorance’. Raman did not bother the king’s comment. 
The problem is about the person who sow the paddy 
seeds’ . The king did not understand Raman’s utterances. 
‘What is wrong with the person who sow the seeds?! 
Raman’s intelligence began to work instantly. He said^ 
‘We have to take care of the person who sow the seeds. 
It doesn’t matter, if the person is male or female. But he/ 
she should not have the habit of yawning’. 

‘But is there anybody in the world who does not 
yawn’? The king said in the midst of yawning. The king 
realised the natural fact that all human beings yawn in 
daily life. He remembered the past events, in which he 



Tenali Raman 


scolded the queen for her yawning. The king knew that 
it was the queen Thirumalambal who had sent Raman 
as a mediator towards him. The king announced that he 
is soon going to meet the queen. 

Raman felt victorious in his mission. The king reached 
harem in the same night and apologized to the queen. 
The king and queen presented Raman valuable gifts for 
his service. 

35. DIVINE PARROT 

Th e king possessed a parrot. It always chanted man- 
tras. People believed that the parrot had divine powers. 
The king told the uniqueness of the parrot to Raman. 
‘We too achieve God’s grace by chanting mantras like 
this bird’, the king said. 

The king gave a fruit to the parrot, which was locked 
in a cage. As soon as it received the fruit, the parrot 
began to chant prayers. After that the parrot ate the fruit. 
Raman opined that the parrot had no such divine 
powers. It chanted prayers in order to receive the fruit. 
The king challenged Raman to prove his argument. 
Raman accepted the challenge. It won’t chant any prayers 
from tomorrow onwards’, he assured. The king offered 
100 gold coins to Raman if he succeed in his mission. 
Next day, Raman brought a cat and tied near the parrot’s 


Tenali Raman 



cage. Seeing the cat, the parrot started to cry loudly. 
It thought that the cat would kill him. The bird didn’t 
chant prayers afterwards. It was concerned only with its 
life and safety. Thus Raman proved that parrot had no 
divine powers. Raman received 100 gold coins from the 
king as gift. 


36. DEFEATED SOLDIER 

Once the king, a soldier and Raman had gone to a 
remote area of Vijayanagaram, where low caste people 
were living. The villagers followed an uncivilized life 
style. They used to eat dead animals and birds meat. But 
they did not kill and eat animals and birds. The civilized 
people hated them due to such kind of life style. 

The soldier boasted himself, ‘I don’t eat dead animal’s 
meat, even if I had to suffer a lot’ . Raman didn’t like it. 
‘If I had to live under such circumstances, I too eat what 
they provide’, Raman said. But the soldier remained in 
his earlier stand of not eating dead animal’s meat. Raman 
challenged the soldier as he didn’t like the boldness of 
the soldier. The king accepted the challenge put 
forwarded by Raman. 

The king made arrangements for the soldier to reside 
in the village, where the untouchables were living. He 
was not permitted to leave the village. The villagers ate 



Tenali Raman 


only ragi, other than the dead animal’s meat. But the 
soldier disliked ragi. He had to live without any food for 
a week. He became lean. The soldier* doubted whether 
he would die of starvation. Finally he had to eat the dead 
animal’s meat and ragi. Raman had won the bet. The 
soldier conceded the defeat. 


37. MONEYLENDER PUNISHED 

A moneylender named Ratnachandran lived in 
Vijayanagaram. He charged heavy interest from the 
people for the loans. While he charged 50 percent inter- 
est, other moneylenders charged only 10-15 percent. 

Raman came to know about the exorbitant interest 
charged by Ratnachandran. He decided to teach a les- 
son to the moneylender. Raman borrowed five copper 
plates from Ratnachandran. It was borrowed as loan 
through his friend Yogayya. When he returned the plates 
there were five small utensils in addition to that. 
Ratanachandran was surprised^Why is this small uten- 
sils?’, he asked. 

‘These were the utensils delivered by the big plates’, 
Yogayya said. As a cunning greedy moneylender 
Ratnachandran was eager to possess the small utensils 
also. ‘Okay. I forgot to remind you that the utensils were 


Tenali Raman I _ I 

pregnant at the time of lending’. He took away all the 
utensils to his room. 



After a week, Raman called Yogayya again, ‘You go 
and borrow two gold plates as loan.’ Ratnachandran 
handed over gold plates without any hesitation. He 
reminded Yogayya that the gold plates were pregnant. 
‘You must return the baby plates, when you come back.’ 
Ratnachandran’s shrewdness began to work. 



Tenali Raman 


60 

Yogayya reached Raman’s house with the gold plates. 
Raman melted the plates and converted them into small 
ones. He presented the small melted plates to those 
people who suffered at the hands of Ratnachandran ear- 
lier. After two days, Ratnachandran called on Yogayya 
and demanded the gold plates. He was expecting the gold 
plates and little utensils. 

Yogayya replied that the mother and baby utensils 
died at the time of delivery. He had been well taught by 
Raman to fool Ratnachandran. The dejected money- 
lender approached the king and complained. Raman who 
intervened in the matter told the king the whole episode. 
The king ordered to arrest Ratnachandran for charging 
excessive interest on loans. 

38. RAMAN DISLIKES FLATTERY 

Tenali Raman and the court priest Tathachary had 
different habits and manners. While Tathachary praised 
the king for his selfish motives, Raman was just the 
opposite. He was bold enough to criticise the king. He 
did not flatter anybody for personal gains. 

Once the king arranged sumptuous meal at the 
palace. Tathachary and Raman had also participated in 
it. Tathachary said, ‘Is there anything in the world which 


Tenali Raman 


gives more happiness than king’s hospitality of provid- 
ing food?’. Raman disliked the priests flattery. ‘Purging 
is more happier than sumptuous food’, Raman countered-. 
The King Krishnadevarayar also -did not like Raman’s 
reply. He intervened. 

Raman agreed to prove that his stand was right. The 
king nodded consent. Raman put the king in a closed 
room, at the time of nature’s call. The king had to reach 
the toilet soon. But he was trapped inside a closed room, 
by Raman. The king was uncomfortable. He cried with 
stomach pain. At last Raman came and opened the door. 
The king defecated well. He was relieved. When he came 
out of the toilet, king thanked Raman for letting him 
free, The king sighed relief. ‘ Defecation is more joyful 
than eating, isn’t it lord?’ Raman asked. The king had 
no different answer. Thus Raman once more proved wise 
and intelligent. 

39. WRESTLER FLEES 

Once a wrestler from Delhi came to Vijayanagaram. 
He participated in various fighting competitions. Every- 
one lost to the wrestler from Delhi. The king felt ashamed 
about this. He wanted to see the wrestler defeated. 

At last the king sought the help of Tenali Raman. He 
agreed to make the wrestler flee from Vijayanagaram. 



Tenali Raman 

Raman did not have any knowledge of wrestling. But 
he was quite sure of driving out the wrestler. Raman 
called on him and asked ‘Do you know the tricks in 
numerology?’ The wrestler got surprised. He remained 
silent. Raman consoled him and told about the new game 
in wrestling. 

The wrestler didn’t understand what Raman was talk- 
ing. He felt something fussy. He didn’t hear about 
numerology game ever before. The wrestler planned to 
escape from Vijayanagaram without entering into the 
arena. For that purpose he dressed like a wood cutter 
and escaped in midnight from Vijayanagaram. 

Tenali Raman triumphed at last. The king presented 
Raman 1000 gold coins for retaining the glory of king- 
dom. 

40. A SCHOLAR DEFEATED 

The King Krishnadevarayar was famous for his 
hospitality. He welcomed scholars from every walk of 
life. Once a scholar from Orissa reached Vijayanagaram. 

He challenged the inmates of the durbar for a debate. 
Everybody was afraid of confronting the scholar. They 
knew about his abilities and past record. The king called 
the scholars of his durbar to come forward and chal- 
lenge the guest. They all avoided the situation to face 


Tenali Raman I ^ I 

the scholar. At last the king sought the help of Raman. 
He wanted to safeguard the prestige of his kingdom at 
any cost. 

Raman agreed to face the scholar. He placed a book, 
wrapped in red silk cloth, before the scholar. The scholar 
was anxious. He asked Raman ‘What is it?’ ‘It is the 
book called. ‘THILAKASHTA MAHISHA BAND- 
HANAM’ , Raman replied. The scholar was surprised. 
‘I haven’t heard of such a book’, he said to himself . 

Raman challenged the scholar to have a debate next 
day based on that book. The scholar has to admit the 
challenge. He could not sleep on that night thinking of 
the rare book. The scholar planned to flee from 
Vijayanagaram. For that purpose, he lied to the king that 
he was ill. He returned to Orisa and searched for the 
book but could not find it. There was no such book named 
‘THILAKASHTA MAHISHA B ANDHANAM’ 

Next day, the king called Raman and enquired about 
the trick he played to drive out the scholar. Raman opened 
the silk cover and showed it to the king. There was no 
book inside the cover, but only sesamum, firewood and 
a rope. He said, ‘ THILAM means sesamum, KASHTA 
means firewood and MAHISHA B ANDHANAM means 
rope used to tie buffalo’. The king joined Raman in 
the wild laughter. He gave Raman a diamond ring as 
reward. 



Ten ali Raman 


41. HOOVE OF DEVADASI 

The King Kri s Hh nade va ray ar had an affair with a 
‘Devadasi’ (tempos dancer) named Krishnaveni. He 
was sure that she w#as not involved with any other men. 
The king wanted to • marry her. But he was afraid of the 
public hatred as ni°!? ost people disliked Devadasi girls. 

As usual, the kingig sought the help of Raman. Raman 
earlier disagreed tfitlP th the king’s intention. ‘It is to amass 
huge wealth, that thene Dev.adasi pretends love. She will 
elude you if she fifldgHs a man wealthier than you’, Raman 
advised the king. Buiimt the king was not prepared to give 
up his plan. ‘She is ne/mot like that, she has dedicated me in 
her heart. If you prcirove that, she would elude me and 
love any other it#. IJ» I will present you 1000 gold coins’, 
the king promised RsiRaman. 

Raman was exited. He thought of gaining 1000 gold 
coins. Raman availed led of three months leave from the 
routine palace tforldn'k. He reached near Krishnaveni’s 
house and began tojf > meditate under a banyan tree. For 
that purpose, he Regressed like a sage. Krishnaveni saw 
the ‘sanyasi’ and®# >ched near him. He gave the Devadasi 
10 gold coins and res'! requested, ‘Can you buy me fruits 
with this money?’ W She was surprised. A sage in posses- 
sion of gold coins- H.H He may know the magic of making 
money, Krishna® »i thought. Otherwise he would not 
spend such an ainwunt to buy fruits. The sage gave the 
same amount several ill'** d times to the Devadasi, for purchas- 
ing fruits. 


65 | 

Several days passed. The Devadasi became closer to 
the sage. Their affinity towards each other increased day 
by day. One day Krishnaveni requested, ‘I understand 
that you know the magic of making money. Kindly teach 
me the trick’. The sage became happy that he was going 
to succeed in his mission. He replied, ‘Like your inter- 
est of making money, I too have an interest in you’ 
Krishnaveni tried to object it, ‘it is not proper for a sage 
to get attracted to women’. 

‘Why are you interested in making money? You are 
soon going to become the queen of Krishnadevarayar. 
The king has huge wealth in his custody’, the sage said. 
But Krishnaveni was eager to learn the magic of money 
making. She thought, ‘If I learn the magic, by pretend- 
ing love to the sage, I can earn lot of money and marry a 
man according to my choice’ . This was the attitude of 
Krishnaveni. Raman in disguise as sage put forward 
certain conditions before the Devadasi. ‘I will stay in 
the house near the temple. You should send me a love 
letter. It should contain the request inviting me to your 
house. I will do the rest as soon as I receive the letter’, 
Raman suggested. Krishnaveni agreed to do so. 

As soon as Raman received the letter, he showed it to 
the king. He understood that the Devadasi had no sin- 
cere love for him. He gave 100 gold coins to Raman as 
promised. Raman got additional gifts from the queens, 
as they were happy with his performance. It was Raman’s 
work that saved the king from the Devadasi’s trap. 



41. LOVE OF DEVADASI 

The King Krishnadevarayar had an affair with a 
‘Devadasi’ (temple dancer) named Krishnaveni. He 
was sure that she was not involved with any other men. 
The king wanted to marry her. But he was afraid of the 
public hatred as most people disliked Devadasi girls. 

As usual, the king sought the help of Raman. Raman 
earlier disagreed with the king’s intention. ‘It is to amass 
huge wealth, that the Devadasi pretends love. She will 
elude you if she finds a man wealthier than you’ , Raman 
advised the king. But the king was not prepared to give 
up his plan. ‘She is not like that, she has dedicated me in 
her heart. If you prove that, she would elude me and 
love any other man, I will present you 1000 gold coins’, 
the king promised Raman. 

Raman was excited. He thought of gaining 1000 gold 
coins. Raman availed of three months leave from the 
routine palace work. He reached near Krishnaveni’s 
house and began to meditate under a banyan tree. For 
that purpose, he dressed like a sage. Krishnaveni saw 
the ‘sanyasi’ and reached near him. He gave the Devadasi 
10 gold coins and requested, ‘Can you buy me fruits 
with this money?’ She was surprised. A sage in posses- 
sion of gold coins. He may know the magic of making 
money, Krishnaveni thought. Otherwise he would not 
spend such an amount to buy fruits. The sage gave the 
same amount several times to the Devadasi, for purchas- 
ing fruits. 


Tenali Raman ' 1 

Several days passed. The Devadasi became closer to 
the sage. Their affinity towards each other increased day 
by day. One day Krishnaveni requested, ‘I understand 
that you know the magic of making money. Kindly teach 
me the trick’ . The sage became happy that he was going 
to succeed in his mission. He replied, ‘Like your inter- 
est of making money, I too have an interest in you’ 
Krishnaveni tried to object it, ‘it is not proper for a sage 
to get attracted to women’ . 

‘Why are you interested in making money? You are 
soon going to become the queen of Krishnadevarayar. 
The king has huge wealth in his custody’, the sage said. 
But Krishnaveni was eager to learn the magic of money 
making. She thought, ‘If I learn the magic, by pretend- 
ing love to the sage, I can earn lot of money and marry a 
man according to my choice’. This was the attitude of 
Krishnaveni. Raman in disguise as sage put forward 
certain conditions before the Devadasi. ‘I will stay in 
the house near the temple. You should send me a love 
letter. It should contain the request inviting me to your 
house. I will do the rest as soon as I receive the letter’, 
Raman suggested. Krishnaveni agreed to do so. 

As soon as Raman received the letter, he showed it to 
the king. He understood that the Devadasi had no sin- 
cere love for him. He gave 100 gold coins to Raman as 
promised. Raman got additional gifts from the queens, 
as they were happy with his performance. It was Raman s 
work that saved the king from the Devadasi’s trap. 



42. A SPY SENTENCED 


During 1520 A.D, Vijayanagaram empire had 
planned to attack neighboring Bijapur Kingdom. The 
Bijapur Sulthan sent a spy to Vijayanagaram to know 
about their arms preparation. The spy was a bigot named 
Rajasaheb. He planned to kill Krishnadevarayar. 

Rajasaheb was accustomed to Brahmins’ rituals. He 
knew Sanskrit very well. He was dark in colour and 
looked like a Tamil Brahmin. He was disguised as ‘ Raja 
Iyer’ and introduced to King Krishnadevarayar. The king 
had no hesitation in welcoming the guest, as he behaved 
like a true Brahmin. Nobody in the palace doubted him 
about his real identity. He attained full freedom in and 
around the palace. As a spy, Rajasaheb watched all the 
movements. 

But Tenali Raman was suspicious of guest. He told 
this to the king. He scolded Raman. The spy in disguise 
as a Brahmin, became a friend of the king. Raman 
continued his observation on the spy. One day Raman 
told the king that Raja Iyer was not a Brahmin but a spy 
of Bijapur Sulthan. ‘I can prove you that Raja Iyer is not 
a Brahmin. I will show that he is a Muslim’, Raman 
challenged and the king accepted. 

Raman collected some leeches from the pond and put 
them in cold water. One day, he poured that water on the 
spy while he was sleeping. He woke up suddenly scream- 
ing Allah Allah The king who saw this under- 


Tenali Raman 


stood that the spy was not a Hindu. When the spy got 
frightened, he called Allah. The king ordered to arrest 
the spy. The room in which he stayed was thoroughly 
inspected. Several documents were received from the 



room, which proved that the guest was a spy of Bijapur 
Sulthan. The king sentenced the spy to capital punish- 
ment. He congratulated Raman for saving the country. 
Raman was presented with one lakh gold coins for his 
service. 


Tenali Raman 


43. ANOTHER SPY KILLED 

The rivalry between Vijayanagaram empire and 
Bijapur Kingdom had many other stories to tell. Once 
the Bijapur Sulthan sent another spy to Vijayanagaram 
as an astrologer. He also became a great friend of King 
Krish nadevarayar. 

The ‘astrologer spy’ revealed that the king will die if 
he crossed Thungabhadra river. It was a preplanned idea 
of Bijapur Sulthan to prevent Krishnadevarayar from en- 
tering into his country. If Krishnadevarayar wants to at- 
tack Bijapur, he has to cross Thungabhadra river. The 
king was in a fix. He was on the move to attack Bijapur. 
The queens and ministers prevented the king when they 
heard of the astrologer’s advice. 

As usual the king sought the help of Raman to solve 
the problem. Raman believed that the astrologer is a spy 
of Bijapur Sulthan. The king asked him to prove the 
charge. Raman agreed, but on one condition. ‘Permit me 
to carry out the punishment also if it is proved that the 
astrologer is a spy’, Raman said. The king agreed and 
called the astrologer to the durbar. Raman asked him, 
‘You are a great astrologer. Tell me when will you die?’ 

‘After 34 years’, the astrologer replied quickly. ‘You 
are 43 years old now. That means you will die when you 
attain 77 years’, saying this Raman cut the astrologers 
head, with a sword kept in his waist. The astrologer died 
on the spot. Raman proved that the astrologer’s predic- 


69 | 

tion was wrong. After a thorough search on his body, 
several clues were recovered to prove the espionage. 

The king lat^r crossed Thungabhadra river, fought 
against the Bijapur Sulthan and won the battle. The king 
rewarded Raman as usual. 

44. THE PRIEST PENALISED 

Th e King Krishnadevarayar was caught in a dilemma 
after the death of his mother. One of the wishes of his 
mother was not fulfilled before her death. The priest 
informed the king that the soul of his mother was wan- 
dering around due to this. The king sought the advice of 
the priests for a solution. The priests had other plans in 
their mind. They told the king, ‘The last wish of your 
mother was to eat mangoes. She could not fulfill it. As a 
solution you must donate 12 gold mangoes to 12 Brah- 
min priests. Then only the soul of your mother will rest 
in peace’. 

The king did as advised by the priests. Raman realised 
that the priests had cheated the king. This solution is 
fraud. But he didn’t utter anything. After some days, 
Raman’s mother Lakshmma died of arthritis. As part of 
obsequies Raman gave a feast to the same 12 priests. 
Before they returned home, Raman burned them with 
hot ladle on their thighs. The priests could not under- 
stand what was happening. They wriggled in pain and 
complained to the king. 



I I Tenali Raman 

Raman revealed the reason for his action. ‘My mother 
died of arthritis. Her last wish was to bum her paralysed 
legs with hot ladle. But her wish could not be fulfilled. 
Her soul is wandering around here. I did this as part of 
her obsequies’. The people who heard Raman’s justifi- 
cation was happy. They all hated the priests. 

The king realised the whole episode. The Brahmin 
priests had betrayed him by taking golden mangoes. 
Raman gave them suitable penalty. The priests became 
the enemy of Raman. 

45. CONSPIRACY FAILS 

The head priest Tathachary also joined the other 
priests in conspiring against Raman. They all planned 
to take revenge on Raman for burning them. Tathacahry 
called Tenali Raman and said, ‘I have become old. I have 
to find a successor. A suitable person has to be trained 
as a head priest. I think you are the right person. You 
must accept me as your guru. I will make you an expo- 
nent in tantrik poojas’. 

Raman did not hesitate. But he felt something wrong 
in Tathachary’s move. He was unaware of the priests’ 
motive. Among the priests, Somayajalu was very poor 
and simple. Raman gave him 10 gold coins to become 
acquainted with him. They soon became friends. Raman 


Tenali Raman 1 ' 1 I 

understood the conspiracy of the priests through 
Somayajalu. 

The priests planned to burn Raman during the 
ceremony. At the start of the ceremony, Raman will 
present 100 gold coins to the guru. Subsequently, a sym- 
bol will be affixed on Raman’s body with a hot ladle. 
Then one of the priests will ask Raman a questionnaire 
like this: 

‘Raman is not a Brahmin priest to do the poojas. He 
is only a ‘Niyogi’ Brahmin. Such persons are not 
entitled to become priests’. The other priests will join 
in this discussion and agree on this stand. Meantime, 
they will bum Raman using hot ladle and send him away. 
This plan of the priests were well narrated by Somayajalu 
to Raman. 

Finally, the day arrived for Raman to become a dis- 
ciple. The chief priest started the rituats early in the morn- 
ing. The other priests in the meantime arranged hot ladle 
to burn Raman. He asked Tathachary, ‘Can a Niyogi 
Brahmin become the royal priest? Whether the vedic 
science permit it?’ All the priests wondered by hearing 
the question. They didn’t expect such a question from 
Raman . The priests were in a dilemma to answer the 
question. 

If they let out Raman on the ground that a Niyogi 
Brahman is not eligible to become royal priest, their con- 
spiracy of burning him cannot take place. If they permit 



72 


Tenali Raman 


him, their conservative mind will collapse. Raman re- 
treated from the scene. When the king asked the reason, 
he narrated the whole episode about the conspiracy of 
the priests to bum him. 


46. BRIDE THROWS SANDALS AT 
BRIDEGROOM 

Once the king was engaged in a private chat with 
Tenali Raman. In the midst of talk, the king challenged 
Raman for an unusual affair. It was like this. Raman said, 
‘A woman will throw sandals on your face. This will 
happen within one year’. The king accepted this chal- 
lenge, ‘Okay, if that is done, I will give you 100 gold 
coins’. 

After a month, the day of the king’s marriage arrived. 
The bride was Saradambal, daughter of a landlord from 
Malanadu. That family was unaware of the customs and 
rituals of a royal family. Tenali Raman utilised this situ- 
ation. He reached the landlord’s house early in the morn- 
ing. He told the members of the family about the rituals 
and gave the bride a pair of shoes. They were surprised. 
Raman told its speciality. 

‘In Vijayanagaram kingdom, there existed a strange 
ritual of bride throwing sandals at the bridegroom’s face 
at the time of tying nuptial knot. The bridegroom will 


Tenali Raman | 73 1 

later garland these sandals around brides neck’, Raman 
purposely told the lie. The landlords finally did not get 
time to find the truth. 

Then came the auspicious time of tying the nuptial 
knot. The members of the family handed over the san- 
dals to Saradambal. She threw it on the face of 
Krishnadevarayar. All were stunned .But Raman 
controlled the situation. ‘It is a unique ritual of the 
Malanadu empire’, he told the king. The king then re- 
membered his earlier challenge with Raman. He became 
calm and garlanded the bridegroom, as told by Raman. 
The king presented Raman with gold coins as promised. 


47. RAMAN’S FANCY DRESS 

Even after the marriage, the king was not happy. He 
was angry with Raman due to the ‘sandal throwing 
incident’. Raman had also earned 100 gold coins from 
the king during the ceremony. The king ordered to 
debar Raman from entering the palace. Raman obeyed 
and returned, after bowing to the king. ‘ I don’t want to 
see your face anymore’, the king declared. On the next 
day, when the durbar meeting was in progress, 
a strange man came there. His face and head were 
covered with a pot. Everybody laughed at the unusual 
sight. It was Tenali Raman. The pot was really suited to 



Tenali Raman 


his head. There were two holes for the eyes. He peeped 
through the holes and showed gestures at the public. 



Tenali Raman 



During this time, the king entered the durbar. He 
didn’t like the uproar. ‘Who is walking here in fancy 
dress? Tie him’, the king ordered the soldiers. Soon 
came the reply, ‘Oh king ! It is Tenali Raman. You had 
ordered not to show my face. Hence, I covered it with a 
pot , Raman reminded the king’s earlier order. 

The king this time joined in the laughter. He asked 
Raman to remove the pot from his face. Raman obliged. 

48. RAMAN FOOLED ROBBERS 

As a jester, Tenali Raman’s duty begins early morn- 
ing daily. He reached the palace before the king woke 
up. He returned home only after the king went to sleep. 
So Raman got little time to look after his family affairs. 

One day, he was returning home late in the night. On 
the way, he remembered to irrigate his agricultural land. 
It has to be done even at midnight, he thought. Then he 
saw two robbers hiding in his land. The robbers did not 
see Raman. They planned to rob the house after Raman 
went to bed. 

Raman thought of an idea. He called his wife 
Mankamma and said loudly. ‘The country is fed up with 
robbers’ menace. It is not safe to keep valuables like gold 
ornaments in the house. It has to be sealed in a box and 
put it into the well. We can take it back, after drying out 



76 


Tenali Raman 


the well when need arises’. The robbers who heard this 
dreamt of great catch of valuables from the well. 

Meanwhile, Raman and wife sealed a box, contain- 
ing a heavy stone and put it into the well. They went to 
bed for sleep. The robbers began to take the water out 



of the well. The water from the well was diverted to the 
cultivable land. Due to darkness they were afraid of get- 
ting into the well. They continued their task of pouring 
out the water from the well till next day morning. Fi- 
nally they got box containing stone. Raman woke up 


Tenali Raman 


77 


and reached near the well. The robbers began to flee. 
Raman thanked them for irrigating his land. He got the 
work done without spending a single paise. The ashamed 
robbers fled from the spot and escaped. 


49. AN EXPERIMENTAL DEATH 

Tenali Raman had possessed a lot of wealth. Even 
the king used to approach Raman when he was in dire 
need of money. Raman got such huge amount by way of 
presentation and gifts. As a court jester, he received many 
gold coins as reward for his services. 

There was a system of confiscation of wealth by the 
king when wealthy persons died. So Raman did not trust 
the king. He wanted to experiment the consequent 
happenings after his death. Whether the king will look 
after his family members? Will the king pay compensa- 
tion to his relatives? So Raman pretended as ill and later 
as dead. The rumour of his ‘death’ spread all over 
Vijayanagaram. The news reached the palace after some 
days. 

Meanwhile Raman put all his money in a box. The 
lengthy box had holes to breath air. Raman himself laid 
in that box along with the cash. The officials, who 
reached Raman’s house, confiscated the cash box and 
i ai i ied it to the palace. They didn’t realise Raman’s pres- 
ence inside the box. 


Tenali Raman 


78 



When the king unsealed and opened the box, he got 
frightened. The ‘dead’ Raman came out of the box alive. 
Raman said ‘ Oh Lord! I did it because I wanted to know 
what you will do after my death. When I die, please do 
not neglect my family. The old rule of confiscation of 
wealth has to be changed.’ The king became conscious 
about what Raman said. 


50. RAMAN DIES 

The death of Tenali Raman was quite accidental. 
A snake bite led him to death. When he realised that 
death was fast approaching, Raman sent a man to call 





Tenali Raman 


[80 

the king. But the king did not take it seriously. He 
thought, Raman as a jester had sent a man to fool him. 
The king did not go to see his jester. Raman breathed 
his last in the absence of the king. 

Krishnadevarayar wept after hearing the death of his 
dearest friend. The king cried aloud, ‘Oh! Raman, you 
had made me laugh several times. I thought this time 
also you planned to delight me. Otherwise I would have 
reached at your bedside. You had amused me up to your 
death. Now you have left me by providing sorrow.’ 

The death of Tenali Raman caused deep sorrow not 
only to the king but also to the entire Vijayanagaram 
empire. Even though Raman died long ago, he is still 
alive in the hearts of millions of people for his wise and 
homorous activities. 

